---
layout: post
title: "If you are the Son of God ..."
comments: false
description: "Mar 10th 2019 Mass Reading Reflection"
keywords: "temptation, sinners, repentance, Lent"
---

[First Sunday of Lent](https://www.ewtn.com/daily-readings/?date=2019-03-10)

```
Dt. 26:4-10
Ps. 91:1-2, 10-11, 12-13, 14-15
Rom. 10:8-13
Lk 4:1-13
```
The Israelites equated God with flamboyancy, and this is clear from the remembrance of the saving power for God from the time of Moses in the First Reading; “the Lord brought us out of Egypt with mighty hand and outstretched arm, with great terror, with signs and wonders; and gave us this land flowing with milk and honey.”(Dt. 26:4-10) Thus, anybody who claims to be of God had to have the same flair. Jesus, claiming to be the Son of God, was nowhere near this which is why even to His death, they kept on asking for a sign. “Come down from the cross, if you are the Son of God!” (Mt. 27:40).If you are the Son of God...

What does it mean to be the Son of God? It could be that to be the Son of God, one has to be prepared to shoot oneself in the foot. For Christ was hungry, and He refused to eat. He had the assurance of God’s care and protection, and He wouldn’t take advantage of it. He had the opportunity to own massive Real Estate, and He chose homelessness. Any hardship that Jesus suffered later on in life is as a direct result of the choices He made at this time. Of course, this hardship depends whose point of view we are considering. 

An incident, later on in the Public Ministry of Jesus, shows us that our point of view compared with Christ's is totally different; what we consider loss, Christ considers gain. Jesus' Disciples had gone to buy food, and on returning, urged Him to eat. But Jesus refused saying, “I have food that you do not know about” and they were perplexed. And He explained further, “My food is to do the will of Him who sent me and accomplish His work” (Jn. 4:31-34). Therefore, the Son of God is one who has places utmost importance on doing the will of God, so much so that nothing else matters.

We are usually faithful to God, some of the time. We seek and follow His will whenever it is convenient for us; when it fits in with our schedule. But when we reach the limit of our endurance, then we leave our soul up for grabs to the highest bidder. Our hearts are always in conflict with God with every changing situation, and it gets to that point where we simply can’t deal, and we turn away from God. This conflict happens possibly because we, like the Israelites, have built our faith on the accounts of great and mighty deeds of God. 

We, like them, want something from far and away; something from the outside to override and overwhelm our senses, but Saint Paul reiterates that what we are looking for is within our grasp; it is on our lips and in our hearts. The great sign we are looking for, we will only see, if we confess with our lips and believe in our hearts. Therefore, rather than faith coming from awe, as in the time of Moses, and which didn’t last, awe will come from faith. And we have the assurance that, “Nobody who believes in Him will be put to shame.” (Romans 10:11).

It is interesting that both at this temptation and on the Cross, Jesus was at His weakest where, according to our judgement, it would not have been wrong to give in to the pressure. Firstly, he had reached the limit of His endurance, so what else was God expecting of Him? We would rather say, “Jesus has tried, let Him enjoy small”.  Secondly, it will have been to His benefit if ALL the people believed He was the Son of God. If something so little could cause a great gain, why should He refuse? Wasn’t that the whole point? To save the whole human race? We would rather say, “Jesus is not sharp or savy".

It seems that the first part of our salvation is to be saved from ourselves. We are constantly moving back and forth between faithfulness and unfaithfulness, and the danger is that our hearts will settle into permanent hardness; before we know it, God is out of the door – locked, bolted and sealed out – and we won’t realise it. Just like the Pharisees. That is why the words Jesus gave us are much more important than if He set all the heavenly bodies spinning and lifted the waters of the ocean to heavens. He gives us words to live by because whenever we are at the limit of our endurance, it is always one or all of these scenarios that we are battling with. 

“Man shall not live by bread alone.” (Luke 4:4) It has been proven that hunger is powerful enough to end wars, no matter how vicious or “tame” the war is. I have read of a situation where the soldiers were strong enough to resist hunger and fought on bravely. However, when the opposing side strategized to make the aroma of food being cooked to waft to the battleground, they were defeated; they couldn’t concentrate on the fight anymore because the lower needs suddenly became overwhelming. Hunger is powerful. Hunger is not to be taken lightly. And yet, it is and must be subject to God. 

It is easy to forget that we are alive, not because we are ingesting the right type and amount of nutrients, but because God wills it so. We stay or go only with only a word from God “You return men to dust and say, ‘Return, O children of man!’” (Psalm 90:3). Our lower needs overwhelm us that it doesn’t seem humane to deny them. Yet, all our needs and passions are subject to God and we must work to bring them under subjection. Not under our own subjection, but under God’s subjection. We fail because we want to bring them under our own subjection. It is precisely because the needs overwhelm us, that we need to subject them to a higher power. This happens when we, first, subject ourselves to God; our needs and passion will follow suit. 

“You shall worship the Lord your God, and Him only shall you serve.” (Luke 4:8) We might not haven’t given a serious thought to the question, “Who do I really serve?” because we feel the outcome of our lives will be the same either way. But this is not so. “See, I set before you today life and prosperity, death and destruction. For I command you to love the Lord your God …. But… if you are drawn away to bow down to other gods and worship them… you will certainly be destroyed… Now, choose life…” (Deut. 30:15-20). Our well-being is in the hands of the Lord; loyalty to Him seals the deal. It does not mean we will not have trouble or calamity, persecution or hunger but we will be convinced of God’s love and stay calm. “Can anything ever separate us from Christ’s love? Does it mean He no longer loves us if we have trouble or calamity or … threatened with death? … No, despite all these things, overwhelming victory is ours through Christ, who loved us…. And I am convinced that nothing can separate us from God’s love” (Rom. 8:35-38) .

“You shall not tempt the Lord your God.” (Luke 4:12) Even in times of old when God performed His great and mighty deeds, none of the works of God were done simply for the sake of it. There are times when a miracle isn’t exactly what we need, but we still ask for it. It becomes an insistent need that our whole life becomes hinged on the fulfilment of that miracle. Every time a new need comes up, we put God on the hot seat and say, “If you are God…prove it”. If our love is based on proofs, then we will never have a real relationship with God. “He who dwells in the shelter of the Most High … says to the Lord, ‘My refuge, my stronghold, my God in whom I trust!’” (Ps 91:1-2) This “He” is we. And God replies, “Since he clings to me in love … I will be with him in distress. I will deliver him and give him glory” (Ps 91:14 -15). This is the sort of relationship God desires of us. This is the sort of relationship the Son of Man has with God.  

Jesus helps us to put life in a clear perspective and shows us that everything we desire in this world is worthless compared to what God has in store for us. And if it seems like hardship, it is because it is totally different from what we are used to. If it was similar or the same, why should we bother? If we are to be sure that our faith is leading us in the right direction, then we must move from the group of people seeking signs and mighty deeds to the group of people seeking the will of God. Because the Son of Man came to make us Sons, and so co-heirs with Him. “Who shall climb the mountain of the Lord? Who shall stand in His Holy place? The man with clean hands and pure heart; who desires not worthless things… He shall receive the blessings from the Lord, and reward from the God who saves him. Such are the men who seek Him; seek the face of the God of Jacob” (Psalm 24:3-6)
